A.F.R.
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRLA NO. 617 of 2010
(In the matter of application under Section 378(4) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.)
Rebati Ballav Tripathy
Appellant
-versus-
State of Odisha (G.A. Dept.)
Respondent
For Appellant
:
Mr. S.K. Mund, Sr. Advocate
For Respondent
:
Mr. M.S. Rizvi, ASC (Vig.)
CO
appearing along with Ms.
A.K. Dei, Advocate
CORAM:
JUSTICE G. SATAPATHY
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 05.02.2024
G. Satapathy, J.
सत्यमेव जयते
1.
This appeal U/S. 374 (2) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (In short the 'Code') read
with Section 27 of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988 (In short the 'Act') by the convict is directed
against the judgment passed on 16.12.2010 by the
learned Special Judge, Vigilance, Sambalpur in T.R.
Case No. 25 of 1998 convicting the appellant for
committing an offence punishable U/S.7 of the Act
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 1 of 20
while acquitting him of the offences U/Ss. 13(2) read
with Section 13(1)(d) of the Act and sentencing him
to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months
with a fine of Rs.2,000/-, in default whereof, to
undergo R.I. for further period of one month.
2.
The prosecution case in precise was that on
22.09.1997, at about 7 A.M. when Bijaya Bhengra
(informant) of village Shankara had been to the
office of the convict, who was then S.I. of Excise,
Sundargarh, in
connection
with an Excise raid
conducted in his house on 17.09.1997, but the
HAYlage Shank
convict initially demanded bribe of Rs.500/- to close
the case, however, the convict subsequently reduced
his demand of bribe to Rs.200/ -. Finding no way out,
on 22.09.1997, Bijay Bhengra lodged an F.I.R.
against the convict
before the S.P. Vigilance,
Sambalpur under Ext.7
for demanding bribe of
Rs.200/- and accordingly, the Sambalpur Vigilance
P.S. Case No. 40 of 1997 was registered.
On the basis of Ext.7 (F.I.R.) a trap was
arranged and P.W.1 Shashanka Sekhar Mohanty was
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 2 of 20
selected to accompany the informant to the Office
of convict to overhear the conversation between the
informant & the convict and see the transaction of
bribe. Accordingly, PW1 along with others including
the informant went to the Office of the convict and
the informant and P.W.1 proceeded to the Office of
convict and on being demanded by the convict, the
informant paid the bribe of Rs.200/- which was
the bribe
and
thereafter P.W. 1
accepted
by the convict
raiding party and
relayed
the signal to
the
thereafter, P.W.3 Basant Kumar Sahu and other
members of raiding party rushed to the spot and
caught the convict red handed. The hand wash and
pocket wash of the shirt of the convict were taken
separately with sodium carbonate solution, which
turned into pink and the same were collected
separately in bottles duly labeled and sealed. P.W.2
Purna Chandra Pradhan recovered the tainted
money and compared its serial number with
numbers earlier noted by him which were found
tallied. Accordingly, the convict was arrested and
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 3 of 20
forwarded to the Court for committing offences
U/Ss. 13(2) r/w Section 13 (1)(d)/7 of the Act and
sanction was obtained to launch prosecution against
the convict in the course of investigation and the
hand wash and pocket wash kept in separate bottles
were sent to laboratory for chemical examination
which confirmed the presence of phenolphthalein
powder in the solutions in bottles sent. As usual on
Itions i
of investigation,
charge sheet was
submitted against the convict for offences U/Ss.
13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d)/7 of the Act under
which cognizance was taken and the convict was put
to trial for the aforesaid offences when he denied to
plead guilty to the charge.
he charge. A
3.
In support of the charge, the prosecution
examined altogether three witnesses, proved the
documents under Exts.1 to 13 and identified one
material object M.O .- I brash seal as against the sole
oral evidence of D.W.1 Krushna Charan Mohanty and
solitary documentary evidence of Ext.A by the
defence in support of its plea of thrusting of money
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 4 of 20
by the decoy in his shirt pocket. Unfortunately, the
informant died before he could be examined in the
trial.
4.
The plea of the convict in the course of trial
was denial simplicitor and false implication with
specific plea that on 24.09.1997, the informant
forcibly thrust some G.C. notes into his pocket and
thereby, he shouted and threw away the said G.C.
notes, but the Vigilance people caught him and then
one Kurshna Charan Mohanty was also present there
and was taking bath.
5.
After appreciating the evidence on record
upon hearing the parties, the learned Special Judge,
Vigilance, Sambalpur finding the accused to have
accepted the bribe convicted the appellant by relying
upon the evidence on record and invoking the
presumption U/S 20 of the Act, but the Special
Judge, Vigilance, Sambalpur, however, acquitted the
appellant for offences U/Ss. 13(2) r/w Section
13(1)(d) of the Act for want of evidence with regard
to the demand of bribe by the convict-appellant.
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 5 of 20
6.
Mr. S.K. Mund, learned Senior Counsel
appearing along with Ms. A.K. Dei, learned counsel
for the appellant has submitted that although the
learned trial Court has acquitted the convict-
appellant for offences U/Ss. 13(2) r/w Section
13(1)(d) of the Act which is essentially the offence
for demand of bribe, but ignoring the failure of
prosecution to prove the demand of bribe by the
appellant, the Special Judge, Vigilance, Sambalpur
erroneously convicted the appellant for offence
romeo
The sprove to del
U/S.7 of the P.C. Act, which is unsustainable in the
eye of law since the demand and acceptance are the
principal ingredients of the offence and mere
acceptance of bribe without any demand would not
by itself establish the offence U/S. 7 of the Act. It is
further submitted that when the demand is not
established, invoking the presumption one under the
Section 20 of the Act is clearly impermissible in law,
but the learned trial Court had erroneously invoked
the said presumption. Mr. Mund has accordingly,
prayed to allow the appeal to acquit the appellant of
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 6 of 20
the charge by setting aside the impugned judgment
of conviction and order of sentence by relying upon
the decisions in (i) K. Santhamma v. State of
Telangana: AIR 2022 SC 1134, (ii) Neeraj
Dutta v. State (Government of NCT of Delhi):
2023 4SCC 731, (iii) V. Venkata Subbarao v.
State, represented by Inspector of Police, A.P .:
(2007) AIR (SC) 489.
On the other hand, Mr. M.S. Rizvi, learned
Asc /Von the
R
ASC (Vig.), however, while supporting the impugned
judgment of conviction has submitted that since
acceptance of bribe by the appellant was proved
beyond all reasonable doubt by unimpeachable
evidence
of the Sprosecut
witnesses, the
conviction of the appellant for offence U/S.7 of the
Act cannot be questioned, since the same is legally
permissible. Accordingly, Mr. M.S. Rizvi, learned ASC
(Vig.) has prayed to dismiss the appeal.
7.
After having bestowed a careful and anxious
consideration
to the impugned judgment of
conviction together with evidence on record keeping
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 7 of 20
in view the rival submissions, it admittedly appears
that the learned trial Court having not found any
direct evidence of demand of illegal gratification by
the appellant has acquitted him of the charge for
offences U/Ss. 13(2) r/w Section 13(1)(d) of the
Act, but however, it has found the appellant to have
failed to rebut the legal presumption as available U/S
20 of the Act for accepting bribe of Rs.200/- as an
illegal
gratification from
the
r accepting
complainant and
there
proceeded to convict the appellant for
offence U/S 7 of the P.C. Act. In this case, the
complainant died before he could be examined for
the prosecution, but the accompanying witness
namely Shashanka Sekhar Mohanty while being
examined as P.W.1 has not wholly supported the
prosecution case and he was also declared hostile by
the prosecution, but the prosecution by relying upon
the evidence of other official witness (PW2) and Trap
Laying Officer (PW3) has convicted the appellant for
offence U/S 7 of the Act.
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 8 of 20
8.
A conscious reading of the evidence on record
in the form of the evidence of all the three
witnesses, it is not found as to what transpired
between the complainant and the
appellant
inasmuch as P.W.1 being the accompanying witness,
who was supposed to overhear the conversation
between the appellant and the complainant and see
the transaction of bribe, has only stated to the effect
the complainant
proceeded to the quarter of the accused (appellant)
and the complainant entered into the premises of the
appellant and he stood on the other side of the road
near a cabin and saw the complainant knocking the
door and the accused (appellant) came outside and
they talked among themselves. It is his specific
evidence that the complainant was talking to the
accused (appellant) with his back towards him. It is,
therefore, very clear that the person who could have
seen the transaction between the appellant and the
complainant was neither able to see the transaction
nor overhear the conversation between them. The
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 9 of 20
prosecution, therefore, is clearly short of evidence to
establish the transaction of bribe and conversation
between the appellant and the complainant.
9.
On examining the evidence of P.Ws. 2 and 3,
only one thing transpire is that the recovery of
currency notes from one room of the house of the
appellant, but law is very well settled that mere
recovery of currency notes dehors demand ipso facto
would not be sufficient to constitute the offence U/S
7 of the P.C. ient to
P.C. Act. Since it has
been held in
umpteenth times by the Apex Court that the proof of
demand and acceptance of bribe is sine-qua-non to
establish the offence U/S 7 of the P.C. Act. In K.
Santhamma vs. State of Telangana; AIR 2022
SC 1134, the Hon'ble Apex Court in a similar
situation has allowed the appeal by setting aside the
judgment of conviction of the appellant therein by
quoting the observation made by the Apex Court at
paragraph-23 in P. Satyanarayana Murthy vs.
District Inspector of Police, State of Andhra
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 10 of 20
Pradesh and another; (2015) 10 SCC 152 with
approval, as under :-
"23.The proof of demand of illegal
gratification, thus, is the gravamen of the
offence U/S. 7 and 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of
the
Act
and in
absence thereof,
unmistakably the charge therefore, would
fail. Mere acceptance of any amount
allegedly by way of illegal gratification or
recover thereof, dehors the proof of
demand, ipso facto, would thus not
sufficient to bring home the charge under
these two sections of the Act. As a
corollary, failure of the prosecution to prove
the demand for illegal gratification would be
fatal and mere recovery of the amount from
the person accused of the offence Under
Section 7 or 13 of the Act would not entail
his conviction thereunder."
10.
Moreover, very recently in Neeraj Dutta v.
सत्यमेव जयते
State (Government of NCT of Delhi): 2023 4
ORISSA
SCC 731, while answering a reference on the point
whether
in
the
absence
of
evidence
of
complainant/direct or primary evidence of demand of
illegal gratification, is it not permissible to draw an
inferential deduction of culpability/guilt of public
servant U/S 7 and Section 13(1)(d) r/w Section
13(2) of the Act based on other evidence adduced by
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 11 of 20
the prosecution, a Constitutional Bench of Five
Judges of the Apex Court has been pleased to
summarize the law on the issue in paragraph-88 of
the judgment as under :-
88. What emerges from the aforesaid discussion is
summarized as under:
88.1. (a) Proof of demand and acceptance of
illegal gratification by a public servant as a
fact in issue by the prosecution is a sine qua
non in order to establish the guilt of the
accused public servant under Sections 7 and
13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act.
88.2. (b) In order to bring home the guilt of
the accused, the prosecution has to first
prove the demand of illegal gratification and
the subsequent acceptance as a matter of
fact. This fact in issue can be proved either
by direct evidence which can be in the
nature of oral evidence or documentary
evidence.
88.3.(c) Further, the fact in issue, namely
the proof of demand and acceptance of
illegal gratification can also be proved by
circumstantial evidence in the absence of
direct oral and documentary evidence.
88.4.(d) In order to prove the fact in issue,
namely, the demand and acceptance of illegal
gratification by the public servant, the following
aspects have to be borne in mind:
(i) if there is an offer to pay by the bribe-
giver without there being any demand
from the public servant and the latter
simply accepts the offer and receives the
illegal gratification, it is a case of
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 12 of 20
acceptance as per Section 7 of the Act.
In such a case, there need not be a prior
demand by the public servant.
(ii) On the other hand, if the public servant
makes a demand and the bribe-giver accepts
the demand and tenders the demanded
gratification which in turn is received by the
public servant, it is a case of obtainment. In
the case of obtainment, the prior
demand
for
illegal
gratification
emanates from the public servant. This is
an offence under Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and
(ii) of the Act.
(iii) In both cases of (i) and (ii) above,
the offer by the bribe-giver and the
demand
by
the
public
servant
respectively have to be proved by the
prosecution as a fact in issue. In other
words, mere acceptance or receipt of an
illegal gratification without anything
more would not make it an offence
under Section 7 or Sections 13(1)(d),(i)
and (ii), respectively of the Act.
Therefore, under Section 7 of the Act, in
order to bring home the offence, there must
be an offer which emanates from the bribe-
giver which is accepted by the public servant
which would make it an offence. Similarly,
a prior demand by the public servant
when accepted by the bribe-giver and in
turn there is a payment made which is
received by the public servant, would be
an offence of obtainment under Sections
13(1)(d) and (i) and (ii) of the Act.
88.5. (e) The presumption of fact with regard to
the demand and acceptance or obtainment of an
illegal gratification may be made by a court of law
by way of an inference only when the foundational
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 13 of 20
facts have been proved by relevant oral and
documentary evidence and not in the absence
thereof. On the basis of the material on record,
the court has the discretion to raise a presumption
of fact while considering whether the fact of
demand has been proved by the prosecution or
not. Of course, a presumption of fact is subject to
rebuttal by the accused and in the absence of
rebuttal presumption stands.
88.6. (f) In the event the complainant turns
"hostile", or has died or is unavailable to let in his
evidence during trial,
demand of illegal
gratification can be proved by letting in the
evidence of any other witness who can again let in
evidence, either orally or by documentary
evidence or the prosecution can prove the case by
circumstantial evidence. The trial does not abate
nor does it result in an order of acquittal of the
accused public servant.
88.7. (g) Insofar as Section 7 of the Act is
concerned, on the proof of the facts in issue,
Section 20 mandates the court to raise a
presumption that the illegal gratification was
for the purpose of a motive or reward as
mentioned in the said Section. The said
presumption has to be raised by the court as a
legal presumption or a presumption in law. Of
course, the said presumption is also subject to
rebuttal. Section 20 does not apply to Sections
13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act.
88.8. (h) We clarify that the presumption in law
under Section 20 of the Act is distinct from
presumption of fact referred to above in sub-para
88.5(e), above, as the former is a mandatory
presumption while the latter is discretionary in
nature.
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 14 of 20
11.
When the admitted evidence on record is
tested on the touchstone of the law laid down by the
Apex Court in the decision referred to above, there
appears no dispute that in order to rebut
presumption U/S 20 of the Act, the appellant has
admittedly taken a plea that the informant forcibly
thrusted money into his shirt pocket and that too, in
his house, but the learned trial Court has disbelieved
FraŠka
of giving money to the appellant must have taken
place near the door and the instead of throwing the
money to the road, why the accused-appellant threw
the same to a place inside his residence-cum-office
and again,
after / th
throwing
the tainted money,
immediately he closed the door. There cannot be any
cavil of law that the standard of proof required U/S
20 of the P.C. Act is not like the standard of proof to
establish the guilt of the accused beyond all
reasonable doubt and the standard as required is
just like in civil case the "preponderance of
probability". The aforesaid plea as taken by the
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 15 of 20
appellant was also spoken to by P.W.1 in his
evidence to the effect that "the accused-appellant
told that the complainant forcibly kept money in his
pocket and he had thrown the same inside the
abandoned store room." Further, from the evidence
of P.W.2, it is found that those four Rs. 50 GC notes
were found lying in a small open unused room,
whereas the evidence of P.W.3 discloses that the
jerry cans. On the other hand, D.W.1 has stated that
the appellant showed the Vigilance people where he
had thrown the tainted money. It is, therefore, very
clear that the currency notes were not recovered
from the personal possession of the appellant, rather
it was recovered from the house of the appellant. In
the context, the word "accepted" or "obtained" or
"agreed to accept" or "attempted to obtain" are
emphasized in Section 20 of the P.C. Act for drawing
the legal presumption against the accused person as
an illegal gratification other than legal remuneration
or any valuable thing from any person, but mere
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 16 of 20
acceptance of money without there being any other
evidence would not be sufficient to draw the
aforesaid presumption. "Accept" commonly means to
take or receive with consent and if a person willingly
takes or receives, it would certainly amount to
acceptance. On the other hand, "obtain" means to
secure or gain as a result of request. The law on the
point of drawing the presumption, however, has
been set at rest by the Apex Court in paragraph-88
of Neeraj Dutta (supra).
The prosecution allegation in this case is that
the accused had demanded and accepted the illegal
gratification and thereby, the fact in issue involved in
this case was demand and acceptance of bribe by
the appellant which is sufficiently disclosed from the
charge framed against the appellant. The learned
trial Court even though has not found any evidence
with regard to demand made by the appellant, but it
has
erroneously
convicted
the
appellant
for
acceptance of the bribe by misconstruing the
provision of Section 20 of the Act inasmuch as the
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 17 of 20
evidence on record clearly shows that the currency
notes were found from the room, but the learned
trial Court has erroneously held that there is no
possibility of throwing the currency notes in the
room, when the transaction took place near the
door, which was never spoken to by any of the
witness. The sole evidence available for this purpose
is the evidence of P.W.1, who had never stated
A CO
about the transaction to have taken place in front of
door, rather his evidence is clear that there was
some kind of conversation between the accused and
the complainant in front of the door. The law on the
point of acceptance is very clear that mere recovery
of tainted money divorced from the circumstance
under which it were paid is not sufficient to bring
home the guilt of the accused person for the charge
of accepting the bribe, when the substantive
evidence is not reliable. In this case, the learned trial
Court has only placed reliance on Section 20 of the
Act to convict the appellant, but that too, after
considering that the demand was not established by
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 18 of 20
the prosecution which in the circumstance appears to
be unusual and erroneous.
13.
In the circumstance and on a conspectus of
evidence on record together with the discussion
made hereinabove clearly establishes that the
prosecution has not been able to prove the demand
of illegal gratification made by the appellant and
thus, the gravamen of the charge U/S 7 of the Act is
acceptance/ recovery of currency notes alleged to be
illegal gratification without the proof of demand ipso
facto would thus not be sufficient to establish the
charge U/S 7 of the Act against the appellant and
therefore, the conviction of the appellant in this case
appears to be unsustainable in the eye of law.
14.
Resultantly, the appeal stands allowed on
contest, but no order as to costs. The appellant is
acquitted of the charge for offence U/S 7 of the Act.
Consequently, the impugned judgment of conviction
and order of sentence passed on 16.12.2010 by the
CRLA No. 617 of 2010
Page 19 of 20
learned Special Judge, Vigilance, Sambalpur in T.R.
Case No. 25 of 1998 are hereby set aside.
15.
Since the appellant is on bail upon appeal,
he is discharged of his bail bonds.
(G. Satapathy)
Judge
COUR
HIGH
सत्यमेव जयते
ORISSA
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 5th day of February, 2024/S.Sasmal
Signature Not Verified
Page 20 of 20
Digitally Signed
Signed by: SUBHASMRA SAYMAL
Reason: Authentication
Location: High Court of Orissa
Date: 06-Feb-2024 18:24:09
of 2010
